Ref-based RNA-Seq: some fixes, reorganization, QC checks on map… (#1616)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/ref-based/tutorial.md

> ### {% icon details %} More details on the different spliced mappers
>
> Several spliced mappers have been developed over the past years to process the explosion of RNA-Seq data.
>
> [**TopHat**](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml) ({% cite trapnell2009tophat %}) was one of the first tools designed specifically to address this problem. In **TopHat** reads are mapped against the genome and are separated into two categories: (1) those that map, and (2) those that are initially unmapped (IUM). "Piles" of reads representing potential exons are extended in search of potential donor/acceptor splice sites and potential splice junctions are reconstructed. IUMs are then mapped to these junctions.
>
>    ![TopHat](../../images/tophat.png "TopHat (Figure 1 from {% cite trapnell2009tophat %})")
>
> **TopHat** has been subsequently improved with the development of **TopHat2** ({% cite kim2013tophat2 %}):
>
>    ![TopHat2](../../images/13059_2012_Article_3053_Fig6_HTML.jpg "TopHat2 (Figure 6 from {% cite kim2013tophat2 %})")
>

> > To further optimize and speed up spliced read alignment [**HISAT**](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml) ({% cite kim2015hisat %}) was developed. It uses a set of [FM-indices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM-index) consisting one global genome-wide index and a collection of ~48,000 local overlapping 42 kb indices (~55,000 56 kb indices in HISAT2). This allows to find initial seed locations for potential read alignments in the genome using global index and to rapidly refine these alignments using a corresponding local index:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To further optimize and speed up spliced read alignment, [**HISAT2**](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml) ({% cite kim2019graph %}) was developed. It uses a hierarchical graph [FM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM-index) (HGFM) index, representing the entire genome and eventual variants, together with overlapping local indexes (each spanning ~57 kb) that collectively cover the genome and its variants. This allows to find initial seed locations for potential read alignments in the genome using global index and to rapidly refine these alignments using a corresponding local index:
```

Reviewer: My suggestion here would add a new reference `kim2019graph` to be added to the tutorial.bib: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-019-0201-4

>
>    ![Hierarchical Graph FM index in HISAT/HISAT2](../../images/hisat.png "Hierarchical Graph FM index in HISAT/HISAT2 (Figure S8 from {% cite kim2015hisat %})")
>

> > A part of the read (blue arrow) is first mapped to the genome using the global FM index. **HISAT** then tries to extend the alignment directly utilizing the genome sequence (violet arrow). In (**a**) it succeeds and this read is aligned as it completely resides within an exon. In (**b**) the extension hits a mismatch. Now **HISAT** takes advantage of the local FM index overlapping this location to find the appropriate mapping for the remainder of this read (green arrow). The (**c**) shows a combination these two strategies: the beginning of the read is mapped using global FM index (blue arrow), extended until it reaches the end of the exon (violet arrow), mapped using local FM index (green arrow) and extended again (violet arrow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> A part of the read (blue arrow) is first mapped to the genome using the global FM index. **HISAT2** then tries to extend the alignment directly utilizing the genome sequence (violet arrow). In (**a**) it succeeds and this read is aligned as it completely resides within an exon. In (**b**) the extension hits a mismatch. Now **HISAT2** takes advantage of the local FM index overlapping this location to find the appropriate mapping for the remainder of this read (green arrow). The (**c**) shows a combination these two strategies: the beginning of the read is mapped using global FM index (blue arrow), extended until it reaches the end of the exon (violet arrow), mapped using local FM index (green arrow) and extended again (violet arrow).
```

>
>    ![STAR's seed search](../../images/star.png "STAR's seed search (Figure 1 from {% cite dobin2013star %})")
>
> Here a read is split between two consecutive exons. **STAR** starts to look for a maximum mappable prefix (MMP) from the beginning of the read until it can no longer match continuously. After this point it start to look for a MMP for the unmatched portion of the read (**a**). In the case of mismatches (**b**) and unalignable regions (**c**) MMPs serve as anchors from which to extend alignments.
>
> At the second stage **STAR** stitches MMPs to generate read-level alignments that (contrary to MMPs) can contain mismatches and indels. A scoring scheme is used to evaluate and prioritize stitching combinations and to evaluate reads that map to multiple locations. **STAR** is extremely fast but requires a substantial amount of RAM to run efficiently.
>
{: .details}

## Mapping

> We will map our RNA reads to the *Drosophila melanogaster* genome using **STAR** ({% cite dobin2013star %}).

Author: Because the previous citation is inside a detail box, i.e. hidden

> We will map our RNA reads to the *Drosophila melanogaster* genome using **STAR** ({% cite dobin2013star %}).

Reviewer: Make sense, thanks!

>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon details %} Further check for the quality of the data
>
> The quality of the data and mapping can be checked further, e.g. by inspecting read duplication level, number of reads mapped to each chromosome, gene body coverage, and read distribution across features.
>
> *These steps have been inspired by the ones provided in the [great "RNA-Seq reads to counts" tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-reads-to-counts/tutorial.md %}) and adapted to our datasets.*
>
> #### Duplicate reads
>
> In the FastQC report, we saw that some reads are duplicated:
>
> ![Sequence Duplication Levels](../../images/ref-based/fastqc_sequence_duplication_levels_plot.png "Sequence Duplication Levels")
>

> > Duplicate reads are usually kept in RNA-Seq differential expression analysis: they can come from highly-expressed genes. But a high percentage of duplicates may indicate an issue, e.g. over amplification during PCA of low complexity library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Duplicate reads can come from highly-expressed genes, therefore they are usually kept in RNA-Seq differential expression analysis. But a high percentage of duplicates may indicate an issue, e.g. over amplification during PCA of low complexity library.
```

>

> > **MarkDuplicates** from [Picard suite](http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) examines aligned records from a BAM file to locate duplicate reads, i.e. reads mapping at the same location (based on the start position of the mapping).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **MarkDuplicates** from [Picard suite](http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) examines aligned records from a BAM file to locate duplicate reads, i.e. reads mapping to the same location (based on the start position of the mapping).
```

>
> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Check duplicate reads
> >
> > 1. **MarkDuplicates** {% icon tool %}:
> >    - {% icon param-files %} *"Select SAM/BAM dataset or dataset collection"*: `mapped.bam` files (outputs of **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %})
> >
> > 2. **MultiQC** {% icon tool %} to aggregate the MarkDuplicates logs:
> >    - In *"Results"*
> >      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `Picard`
> >      - In *"Picard output"*
> >         - *"Type of Picard output?"*: `Markdups`
> >         - {% icon param-files %} *"Picard output"*: `MarkDuplicate metrics` files (output of **MarkDuplicates** {% icon tool %})
> >
> >    > ### {% icon question %} Question
> >    >
> >    > What are the percentage of duplicate reads for both samples?
> >    >
> >    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >    > > The sample `GSM461177` has 27.8% of duplicated reads and `GSM461180` 25.9%.
> >    > {: .solution}
> >    {: .question}
> {: .hands_on}
>
> In general, we consider normal to obtain up to 50% of duplication. So both our samples are good.
>
> #### Number of reads mapped to each chromosome
>

> > To assess the sample quality (e.g. excess of mitochondrial contamination), check the sex of samples or see if any chromosome have highly expressed genes, we can check the numbers of reads mapped to each chromosome using **IdxStats** from **Samtools** suite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To assess the sample quality (e.g. excess of mitochondrial contamination), check the sex of samples, or see if any chromosome have highly expressed genes, we can check the numbers of reads mapped to each chromosome using **IdxStats** from the **Samtools** suite.
```

>
> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Check the number of reads mapped to each chromosome
> >
> > 1. **Samtools idxstats** {% icon tool %}:
> >    - {% icon param-files %} *"BAM file"*: `mapped.bam` files (outputs of **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %})
> >
> > 2. **MultiQC** {% icon tool %} to aggregate the idxstats logs:
> >    - In *"Results"*
> >      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `idxstats`
> >      - In *"Samtools output"*
> >         - *"Type of Samtools output?"*: `Markdups`
> >         - {% icon param-files %} *"Samtools output"*: `Samtools idxstats` files
> >

> > >    > ### {% icon question %} Question

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> >    > ### {% icon question %} Questions
```

> >    >
> >    > ![Samtools idxstats](../../images/ref-based/samtools-idxstats-mapped-reads-plot.png)
> >    >
> >    > 1. How many chromosomes does the *Drosophila* genome have?

> > >    > 2. Where are mostly mapped the reads?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> >    > 2. Where did the reads mostly map?
```

> >    > 3. Can we determine the sex of the sample?
> >    >
> >    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >    > > 1. The genome of *Drosophila* has 4 pairs of chromosomes: X/Y, 2, 3, and 4.

> > >    > > 2. The reads mapped mostly to chromosome 2 (chr2L and chr2R), 3 (chr3L and chr3R) and X. Some reads mapped on the chromosome 4 as expected as this chromosome is so small.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> >    > > 2. The reads mapped mostly to chromosome 2 (chr2L and chr2R), 3 (chr3L and chr3R) and X. Only some reads mapped to chromosome 4, which is expected given this chromosome is very small.
```

> >    > > 3. From the percentage of X+Y reads, most of the reads map to X and only few to Y. So only few genes may be on Y. So the samples are probably both female.
> >    > >
> >    > >    ![Samtools idxstats](../../images/ref-based/samtools-idxstats-xy-plot.png)
> >    > {: .solution}
> >    {: .question}
> {: .hands_on}
>
> #### Gene body coverage
>

> > The gene body is the different regions of a gene. It is important to check if reads coverage is uniform over gene body or if there is any 5'/3' bias. For example, a bias towards the 5' end of genes could indicate degradation of the RNA. Alternatively, a 3' bias could indicate that the data is from a 3' assay. To assess the gene body coverage, we use **Gene Body Coverage** tool from the RSeQC ({% cite wang2012rseqc %}) tool suite. This tool scales all transcripts to 100 nt (using a provided annotation file) and calculates the number of reads covering each nucleotide position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The gene body is the different regions of a gene. It is important to check if reads coverage is uniform over gene body or if there is any 5'/3' bias. For example, a bias towards the 5' end of genes could indicate degradation of the RNA. Alternatively, a 3' bias could indicate that the data is from a 3' assay. To assess this, we can use the **Gene Body Coverage** tool from the RSeQC ({% cite wang2012rseqc %}) tool suite. This tool scales all transcripts to 100 nucleotides (using a provided annotation file) and calculates the number of reads covering each nucleotide position.
```

> >      - {% icon param-files %} *"Input .bam file"*: `mapped.bam` files (outputs of **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %})
> >    - *"Reference gene model"*: BED12 file (output **Convert GTF to BED12** {% icon tool %})
> >
> > 3. **MultiQC** {% icon tool %} to aggregate the idxstats logs:
> >    - In *"Results"*
> >      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `RSeQC`
> >      - In *"RSeQC output"*
> >         - *"Type of RSeQC output?"*: `gene_body_coverage`
> >         - {% icon param-files %} *"RSeQC gene_body_coverage output"*: `(text)` files (outputs of **Gene Body Coverage (BAM)** {% icon tool %})
> >
> >    > ### {% icon question %} Question
> >    >
> >    > ![Gene body coverage](../../images/ref-based/rseqc_gene_body_coverage_plot.png)
> >    >
> >    > How are the coverage across gene bodies? Are the samples biased in 3' or 5'?
> >    >
> >    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >    > >
> >    > > For both samples there is a pretty even coverage from 5' to 3' ends (despite some noise in the middle). So no obvious bias in both samples.
> >    > {: .solution}
> >    {: .question}
> {: .hands_on}
>
> #### Read distribution across features
>

> > With RNA-Seq data, we expect most reads to map to exons rather than introns or intergenic regions. Before going further in counting and differential expression analysis, it may be interesting to check the distribution of reads across known gene features (exons, CDS, 5'UTR, 3'UTR, introns, intergenic regions). For example, a high number of reads mapping to intergenic regions may indicate the presence of DNA contamination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> With RNA-Seq data, we expect most reads to map to exons rather than introns or intergenic regions. Before going further in counting and differential expression analysis, it may be interesting to check the distribution of reads across known gene features (exons, CDS, 5' UTR, 3' UTR, introns, intergenic regions). For example, a high number of reads mapping to intergenic regions may indicate the presence of DNA contamination.
```

>

> > We will here the **Read Distribution** tool from the RSeQC ({% cite wang2012rseqc %}) tool suite, which uses the annotation file to identify the position of the different gene features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Here we will use the **Read Distribution** tool from the RSeQC ({% cite wang2012rseqc %}) tool suite, which uses the annotation file to identify the position of the different gene features.
```

> >
> > 1. **Read Distribution** {% icon tool %}:
> >    - {% icon param-files %} *"Input .bam/.sam file"*: `mapped.bam` files (outputs of **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %})
> >    - *"Reference gene model"*: BED12 file (output **Convert GTF to BED12** {% icon tool %})
> >
> > 2. **MultiQC** {% icon tool %} to aggregate the idxstats logs:
> >    - In *"Results"*
> >      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `RSeQC`
> >      - In *"RSeQC output"*
> >         - *"Type of RSeQC output?"*: `read_distribution`
> >         - {% icon param-files %} *"RSeQC read_distribution output"*: outputs of **Read Distribution** {% icon tool %})
> >
> >    > ### {% icon question %} Question
> >    >
> >    > ![Samtools idxstats](../../images/ref-based/rseqc_read_distribution_plot.png)
> >    >
> >    > What do you think of the read distribution?
> >    >
> >    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >    > >
> >    > > Most of the reads are mapped to exons (>80%), only ~2% to introns and ~5% to intergenic regions. It confirms that our data are RNA-Seq data and that mapping worked.
> >    > {: .solution}
> >    {: .question}
> {: .hands_on}
>

> > Now that we have checked the data and are happy with how it looks, we can proceed to counting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Now that we have checked the results of the read mapping, we can proceed to the next phase of the analysis.
```
